'''Albert Einstein''' ({{IPAc-en|ˈ|aɪ|n|s|t|aɪ|n}} {{respell|EYEN|styne}};<ref name="NDxay" /> {{IPA-de|ˈalbɛʁt ˈʔaɪnʃtaɪn|lang|Albert Einstein german.ogg}}; 14 March 1879&nbsp;– 18 April 1955) was a German-born<!-- Please do not change this—see talk page and its many archives.--> [[Theoretical physics|theoretical physicist]],<ref name="Bio" /> widely acknowledged to be one of the greatest and most influential physicists of all time. Einstein is best known for developing the [[theory of relativity]], but he also made important contributions to the development of the theory of [[quantum mechanics]]. Relativity and quantum mechanics are the two pillars of [[modern physics]].<ref name="frs" /><ref name="YangHamilton2010" /> His [[mass–energy equivalence]] formula {{math|1=[[Mass–energy equivalence#Mass–velocity relationship|''E'' = ''mc''<sup>2</sup>]]}}, which arises from relativity theory, has been dubbed "the world's most famous equation".<ref name="LnLVo" /> His work is also known for its influence on the [[philosophy of science]].<ref name="xZQWt" /><ref name="3UiiT" /> He received the 1921 [[Nobel Prize in Physics]] "for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the [[photoelectric effect]]",<ref name="Nobel Prize" /> a pivotal step in the development of quantum theory. His intellectual achievements and originality resulted in "Einstein" becoming synonymous with "genius".<ref name="wordnetweb.princeton.edu" /> [[Einsteinium]], one of the synthetic elements in the [[periodic table]], was named in his honor.<ref>{{cite web |title=Einsteinium – Element |url=https://www.rsc.org/periodic-table/element/99/einsteinium |work=[[Royal Society of Chemistry]] |access-date=16 December 2022}}</ref>

In 1905, a year sometimes described as his ''[[annus mirabilis]]'' ('miracle year'), Einstein published [[Annus Mirabilis papers|four groundbreaking papers]].{{sfnp|Galison|2000|p=377}} These outlined the theory of the photoelectric effect, explained [[Brownian motion]], introduced [[special relativity]], and demonstrated mass-energy equivalence. Einstein thought that the laws of [[classical mechanics]] could no longer be reconciled with those of the [[electromagnetic field]], which led him to develop his special theory of relativity. He then extended the theory to gravitational fields; he published a paper on [[general relativity]] in 1916, introducing his theory of gravitation. In 1917, he applied the general theory of relativity to model the structure of the [[universe]].<ref name="Nobel" /><ref name="NYT-20151124" /> He continued to deal with problems of [[statistical mechanics]] and quantum theory, which led to his explanations of particle theory and the [[Brownian motion|motion of molecules]]. He also investigated the thermal properties of light and the quantum theory of [[radiation]], which laid the foundation of the [[photon]] theory of light.

However, for much of the later part of his career, he worked on two ultimately unsuccessful endeavors. First, despite his great contributions to quantum mechanics, he opposed what it evolved into, objecting that "God does not play dice".<ref>{{cite journal |url=https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05004-4 |title=Did Einstein really say that? |last=Robinson |first=Andrew |journal=[[Nature (journal)|Nature]] |date=30 April 2018 |volume=557 |number=30 |page=30 |doi=10.1038/d41586-018-05004-4 |bibcode=2018Natur.557...30R |s2cid=14013938 |access-date=21 February 2021 |archive-date=9 November 2020 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20201109033021/https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05004-4 |url-status=live }}</ref> Second, he attempted to devise a [[unified field theory]] by generalizing his geometric theory of [[gravitation]] to include [[electromagnetism]]. As a result, he became increasingly isolated from the mainstream of modern [[physics]].

Einstein was born in the [[German Empire]], but moved to [[Switzerland]] in 1895, forsaking his German citizenship (as a subject of the [[Kingdom of Württemberg]])<ref group=note name=GEcitizen /> the following year. In 1897, at the age of 17, he enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Swiss [[ETH Zurich|Federal polytechnic school]] in [[Zürich]], graduating in 1900. In 1901, he acquired Swiss citizenship, which he kept for the rest of his life, and in 1903 he secured a permanent position at the [[Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property|Swiss Patent Office]] in Bern. In 1905, he was awarded a PhD by the [[University of Zurich]]. In 1914, Einstein moved to [[Berlin]] in order to join the [[Prussian Academy of Sciences]] and the [[Humboldt University of Berlin]]. In 1917, Einstein became director of the [[Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics]]; he also became a German citizen again, this time [[Prussia]]n.